---
layout: default
permalink: /courses/mus172
---
# Music 172 - Computer Music II

_Instructor_<br/>
Jacob Sundstrom: jlsundst [at] ucsd [dot] edu <br/>
Zoom PMI: 999-645-7231 <br/>
Office hours: Tuesday before class (11a-12noon) or by appointment

_TA/Readers_<br/>
John Burnett: jcburnet [at] ucsd [dot] edu <br/>
Ke Chen: kec204 [at] ucsd [dot] edu <br/>
Matthew Chung: mfchung [at] ucsd [dot] edu <br/>

_Schedule_<br/>
Lecture: Tuesday & Thursdays, 2:00p-3:20p <br/>
Lab: Thursdays 3:30p-4:20p <br/>

This is the course website for Computer Music II in Spring 2020. A tentative/rough outline of the course is below; this may be modified as the course moves along. We will be continuing work in [Pd](https://puredata.info/). Please use Pd version 0.50 or greater to ensure compatibility with what I do in class. You're also welcome to turn in work in Python, Octave/MATLAB, or SuperCollider (no Max as some of us use Linux); for the really savvy, you can use C/C++. However, it is your responsibility to ensure that you note or provide all required packages for your code to run/compile on any operating system.

Given the current situation, the entire course will be delivered online via [Zoom](https://ucsd.zoom.us/) with many resources in a [Google Drive folder](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1LRfJ2Vm_M63JiBS76DCifqpMrXyxdif-) you'll need to access with your UCSD email. I've also created a Discord server for us to use and communicate on (my username is notthatintomusic#5359). If you don't have access to these things, please write me. It will be a trial-and-error sort of situation since no one seems to have been prepared for this; any and all feedback on the effectiveness of the lecture delivery during the quarter will be invaluable. I will be recording lectures and posting them online in much the same way Miller does for his classes.

It could also be interesting to explore networked performance/improvisation given how the class will be conducted, depending on student interest. Sending real-time audio over a network (à la JackTrip) is a serious PITA but sending commands through the network as TCP/UDP is far easier and more robust. There are also native objects in Pd for this: [netsend] and [netreceive]. SuperCollider and Python also have easy ways do to this sort of thing.

### Topics

0. _Review_: Sampling, recording, windowing
1. Looping, granular techniques
2. Spectral techniques, convolution, time & pitch shifting
3. Filters, amplifiers, distortion, waveshaping, harmonizers, MIDI
4. Networked performance
5. Spatialization, reverb, vbap, ambisonics

It's a lot of material and we will get through as much as we can. We will dive more in depth on some material if there is interest and time. This also includes potentially jettisoning problematic material given the online nature of the course (spatialization, unfortunately, seems to be a prime target since we can't actually listen to anything). Regardless, I _highly_ recommend that each of you purchase a good set of over-ear headphones.

There will be eight homeworks, generally assigned on a Thursday and due the following Thursday on whatever topic we have been discussing. As is tradition, all your work should be original and copying/pasting from online or your classmates is not accepted. You are welcome to work together but outright copying will cause you to fail the assignment. Late assignments are accepted as long as it is before the due date of the following assignment; that is, you can turn homework one in up to the due date of homework two. A late assignment can earn a maximum of 90% (points are calculated normally, then multiplied by 0.9). There will be a final project that you will be showing "in class" during finals week.  Please turn in all assignments as ZIP files (or tar) with all the paths correctly resolved if you use any external files. They should be turned in via email to both myself and your TA (or Canvas??). __You do not need to turn in any abstractions I've provided via the pdAbstractions folder on the Google Drive unles you have made modifications.__

__HOMEWORK FOLDERS:__ You should have received an invitation from me to your own personal folder. This is the folder to which you will upload homeworks, finals, etc. The permissions should be such that you should not be able to see anyone else's folder and if you can, let me know ASAP. If you didn't get a link, also let me know.

#### Grade Breakdown
- 60% homework (15 points each)
- 30% final
- 10% participation (including showing your final)

### Resources
The most often cited resource will be Miller Puckette's book [The Theory and Technique of Electronic Music](http://msp.ucsd.edu/techniques.htm). There are also the following websites with valuable information on DSP in general:
- [Global JOS Index](https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~jos/jospubs.html)
- [DAFX](http://www.dafx.de/DAFX_Book_Page_2nd_edition/index.html)
- [Designing Sound](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/designing-sound)

Also, please download these general abstractions (or make your own). They'll make your life easier: [abstractions](mus172/abstractions.zip). I'll add other material as the quarter progresses.

## Course Notes
You should be able to access all these links with your UCSD Google account. If you're having trouble, let me know. [The parent folder is here.](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1LRfJ2Vm_M63JiBS76DCifqpMrXyxdif-)
<br/>

### Week 1
[Tuesday](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1yRTjO6GG7QW-5Kw5kAbaP8f1-FKN3LG7), [Thursday](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1LMk5o7AgC9pLQ_W7kL7EohH4Rw2g7Y7a ) <br/>
_Homework 0 (ungraded)_: If you're inclined, send a recent work of yours (or piece of software) and something you've been listening to or watching lately. I'm curious to know what you all listen to and make. Upload as a ZIP file to your folder.
<br/>
<br/>
__Homework 1__: Take [the granular synth we've been making](mus172/02_april2-2020.pd) and add randomness to:
- grain trigger
- grain length
- offset
<br/>
<br/>
This means that each grain should have a random onset time (trigger), length, and offset in the file. Provide controls for these. You are free to use whatever sound you'd like; it doesn't have to be the flute sound used in class, though it is uploaded to 4/2's folder. If you really want to challenge yourself, modify the patch to process LIVE input. __Due Tuesday 4/7 before class.__

#### Disclaimer
In the interest of full transparency, this is the first course I'm teaching at UCSD and the first course I've taught for a few years. Bear with me as I regain my bearings and don't hesitate to provide me with feedback during the quarter. I'm here to help you learn and if it can be done better, I'm all ears.
